# 2.Python Operators

[toc]

# [Python Operators](https://www.codesdope.com/course/python-operators/)

This chapter is about performing operations like addition, subtraction, etc similar to what we do in Maths. In Python, there are symbols which are used to perform certain operations on variables. These symbols are known as **operators**. For example, **(+)** is an operator which is used for adding the values of two variables. Let’s see different types of operators in Python.

- [x]  Arithmetic Operators
- [x]  Relational Operators
- [x]  Logical Operators
- [x]  Assignment Operators
- [x]  Identity Operators
- [x]  Membership Operators

## Arithmetic Operators – `+ - * / % // **`

Arithmetic Operators are the type of operators which take numerical values as their operands and return a single numerical value.

Let’s take two variables `a` and `b` having values ==3 and 2 respectively==.

[Untitled](https://www.notion.so/e9fc96c31a484aa087f42cde58c4522e)

```python
a,b =3, 2
print("sum =", a + b)                              # sum = 5
print("difference =", a - b)                       # difference = 1
print("product =", a * b)                          # product = 6
print("quotient =", a / b)                         # quotient = 1.5
print("quotient (integer) =", a // b)           # quotient (integer) = 1
print("remainder =", a % b)                     # remainder = 1
print("power =", a ** b)                        # power = 9
```

- Difference Between / and // Operators in Python
    
    ---
    
    > </> // operator only truncates(截去) the fractional part of the quotient and not rounds off the quotient to the nearest integer, in other word, returning only the integer part. While / returns the quotient as it is while
    > 
    
    > Another difference between the two operators is that / always return a float (even if the operand is perfectly divisible) and // always return an integer.
    > 
    
    ```python
    a, b = 4, 2
    print("quotient =", (a / b), "of type", type(a / b))# quotient = 2.0 of type <class 'float'>print("quotient =", (a // b), "of type", type(a // b))# quotient = 2 of type <class 'int'>
    ```
    
    As you can see, `/` returned the quotient as `2.0` which is of type `float`, whereas `//`returned the quotient as `2` which is of type `int`.
    

## Relational Operators – `== != < > <= >=`

Relational Operators check the relationship between two operands. They return `True` if the relationship is true and `False` if it is false.

Following is the list of relational operators in Python.

[Untitled](https://www.notion.so/feb04519fc534584958a155aa7793f62)

```python
print(2==2)                         # Trueprint(2==3)                         # Falseprint(2!=2)                         # Falseprint(2!=3)                         # Trueprint(2>3)                          # Falseprint(2<3)                          # Trueprint(2>=3)                         # Falseprint(2>=2)                         # True
```

- Difference Between = And == in Python
    
    ---
    
    Although = and == seem to be the same, they are quite different from each other. = is the **assignment operator** while **==** is the **equality operator**.
    
    = assigns values from its right side operands to its left side operands whereas == compares values.
    
    ```python
    x = 10print(x == 10)          # True
    ```
    
    By writing `x = 10`, we assigned a value *10* to `x`, whereas by writing `x == 10`, we checked if the value of `x` is equal to *10* or not.
    

## Logical Operators – `and || or || not`

In English, In programming also,

A and B - Both A and B. A and B - Both A and B.

A or B - Either A or B. A or B - Either A or B or both.

Again assume the value of ***`a` to be True and that of `b` to be False.***

[Untitled](https://www.notion.so/95977059308649fab07843f809eb35a0)

`and` can be understood as both (both first and second)

`or` can be understood as either (either first or second or both)

## Assignment Operators – `= += -= *= /= //= %= **=`

Assignment Operators are used to assign values from its **right side operands to its left side operands**. The most common assignment operator is **`=`**.

If we write `a = 10`, it means that we are assigning a value 10 to the variable `a`.

> </> We can’t use = to assign the value of the left side operand to the right side operand. For example, 10 = a would give us an error because we are trying to assign the variable a (right side) to 10 (left side) and this is invalid as 10 is a constant and we can’t change its value to something else, a in this case.
> 

There are more assignment operators which are listed in the following table.

[Untitled](https://www.notion.so/541fcb1b709d466fa5bd0e179c8305a3)

To understand their use, consider the value of a variable `n` as 5. Now if we write `n += 2`, the expression gets evaluated as **n = n + 2** thus making the value of `n` as 7 ( n = 5 + 2 ). So the calculated value is assigned to n, changing the value of *n* (making *n = 7*). ==The decision of evaluating n+2 first is not a random one. Python has preset rules of which operation it is going to perform first which you will learn later in this chapter.==

```python
a = 7a += 4  # equivalent to a = a + 4print("Value of a after a += 4:", a)                # Value of a after a += 4: 11a -= 4  # equivalent to a = a - 4print("Value of a after a -= 4:", a)                # Value of a after a -= 4: 7
```

In the above example, initially, the value of `a` is 7. The expression `a += 4` got evaluated as *a = a + 4* thus making the value of `a` as 11. After this, the expression `a -= 4` got evaluated as *a = a - 4* thus subtracting 4 from the current value of `a=11` and making it 7 again.

## Identity Operator – `is || is not` ==if take same memory==

***These are used to check if two operands (values) are located in the same memory***. There are two identity operators in Python - `is` and `is not`.

[Untitled](https://www.notion.so/559d4ed916484cafbecac3d0818a2066)

We know that everything in Python is stored in a different memory location. ***`is` operator is used to check if the operands belong to the same memory location***.

Also note that two variables having the same value does not necessarily mean that their values are stored in the same memory location. Look at the following example.

```python
a = [1, 2, 3]b = [1, 2, 3]print(a == b)               # Trueprint(a is b)               # False
```

The variables `a` and `b` store two separate lists having the same value. Since these are two separate lists, these are stored in different memory locations.

- `a == b` returned `True` because the `==` operator compares the values of the operands and both the lists have the same value.
- `a is b` returned `False` because the is operator compares the memory location of the operands and both the lists are stored in different memory locations.

Now consider another example.

```python
a = [1, 2, 3]b = aprint(a == b)                                   # Trueprint(a is b)                                   # Trueprint(a is not b)                           # False
```

The variable `a` is assigned a list which is stored in some memory location. Therefore, `a` points to the memory location of this list. On writing `b = a`, `b` also started pointing to the memory location which a is pointing to. Since both `a` and `b` are pointing to the same memory location where the list is stored, `a is b` returned `True`and `a is not b` returned `False`.

## Membership Operators – `in || not in` ==only check top-level element==

These are used to check if a value is present in a sequence like string, list, tuple, etc. There are two membership operators in Python - `in` and `not in`.

[Untitled](https://www.notion.so/140a326dbcd14625b7bd5ca097d04d4b)

```python
a = "Python programming"print('on' in a)                                # Trueprint('p' not in a)                         # Falseb = ['Hello', 1, 2, 3]print(2 in b)                                       # Trueprint('ell' in b)                               # Falseprint('Hello' in b)                         # Truec = (1,2,3,"asda")print(1 in c)                                       # Trueprint("as" in c)                                # Falseprint("asda" in c)                          # True
```

`'on' in a` → Returned `True` because ‘on’ is present in “Python programming”.

`'p' not in a` → Returned `False` because ‘p’ is present in “Python programming”.

`2 in b` → Returned `True` because 2 is present in [‘Hello’, 1, 2, 3].

`ell in b`→Returned `False` because `is` only check the top-level elements, like “Hello”, 1, 2, 3. ==So are the Tuple and Set==.

`Hello in b`→Returned `True` because `Hello` is matched with one of top-level elements `Hello`.

```python
a = {1: 'Blue', 2: 'Green', 'default': 'Orange'}print(2 in a)                               # Trueprint('Blue' in a)                  # False
```

`a` is a dictionary having 1, 2 and ‘default’ as keys and ‘Blue’, ‘Green’ and ‘Orange’ as the corresponding values.

`2 in a` → Returned `True` because 2 is a key present in the dictionary `a`.

`'Blue' in a` → Returned `False` because ‘Blue’ is not a key present in the dictionary `a`. **Remember that we search for just the keys, not the values**.
