# What Is Pip? A Guide for New Pythonistas

[Pip Guide for New Pythonistas](https://realpython.com/what-is-pip/)[How pip install Works](https://pydist.com/blog/pip-install)

## What Happens When pip install a package

First pip needs to decide which distribution of the package to install. This is more complex for Python than many other languages, since each version(or release) of a Python package usually has multiple distributions. There are 7 different kinds of distributions, but the most common these days are source distributions and binary wheels.
A source distribution is exactly what it says on the tin—the raw Python and potentially C extension code that the package developers wrote.
A binary wheel is a more complex archive format, which can contain compiled C extension code.
If `pip` downloaded a source distribution, and the wheel package is installed, it will first build a binary wheel specifically for your machine out of the source file.Then it needs to determine which library directory to install the package in—the system’s, the user’s, or a virtual env’s?
This is controlled by **`sys.prefix`**, which in turn is controlled by **`pip's executable path`** and the **`PYTHONPATH`** and **`PYTHONHOME`** environment variables. Finally, it moves the wheel files into the appropriate library directory.

In this tutorial, you’ll learned about:

- [x]  Installing new packages using pip in the command line and with requirement files
- [x]  Managing dependencies, separating development and production requirements, and creating a locked requirements file
- [x]  Finding packages through pip and PyPI
- [x]  Evaluating package dependencies before uninstalling a package and how pip uninstalls packages *** ==pip is a package manager== for Python, used by many projects to manage dependencies. It’s included with the Python installer, which makes it an essential tool for all Pythonistas to know how to use.

Python provides an extensive standard library suitable for developing all sorts of applications, but the Python community provides an even larger set of tools and libraries that speed up Python application development. These tools and libraries are published to the Python Package Index(PyPI), and pip can retrieve and install packages from it.

## Basic Package Installation using pip

use requests as an example.

```
$ pip help
Usage:
  pip <command> [options]

Commands:
  install                  Install packages.
  download                 Download packages.
  uninstall                Uninstall packages.
  freeze                   Output installed packages in requirements format.
  list                     List installed packages.
  show                     Show information about installed packages.
  check                    Verify installed packages have compatible dependencies.
  config                   Manage local and global configuration.
  search                   Search PyPI for packages.
  wheel                    Build wheels from your requirements.
  hash                     Compute hashes of package archives.
  completion               A helper command used for command completion.
  help                     Show help for commands.

General Options:
    .
    .
    .
```

The pip install  command always **looks for** the **latest version** of the package and installs it. It also **searches** for **dependencies** listed in the package `metadata` and **installs** those **dependencies** to insure that the package has all the requirements it needs.

As you can see, when multiple packages were installed. You can look at the package metadata by using the show command in pip:

```
$ pip show requests

Name: requests
Version: 2.21.0
Summary: Python HTTP for Humans.
Home-page: http://python-requests.org
Author: Kenneth Reitz
Author-email: me@kennethreitz.org
License: Apache 2.0
Location: py37\lib\site-packages
Requires: certifi, chardet, idna, urllib3
Required-by:
```

And as you see,it truly install the related dependencies`certifi`|`chardet`|`idna`|`urllib3`.

```
$ pip list

Package    Version
---------- ----------
certifi    2018.11.29
chardet    3.0.4
idna       2.8
pip        19.0.1
requests   2.21.0
setuptools 40.6.2
urllib3    1.24.1
```

## Basic package installation using pip with requirement files

The pip install command always installs the latest published version of a package, but sometimes, you may want to install a specific version that you know works with your code.

You want to create a specification of the dependencies and versions you used to develop and test your application. **`Requirement files`** allow you to specify exactly which packages and versions should be installed. Running pip help shows that there is a `freeze` command that outputs the installed packages in requirements format.

```
$ pip freeze > requirements.txt
$ cat requirements.txt

certifi==2018.11.29
chardet==3.0.4
idna==2.8
requests==2.21.0
urllib3==1.24.1
```

When you want to replicate the environment in another system, you can run pip install specifying the requirements file using the -r switch:

```
$ pip install -r requirements.txt
    .
    .
    .
Successfully installed certifi-2018.11.29 chardet-3.0.4 idna-2.8
  requests-2.21.0 urllib3-1.24.1

$ pip list

Package    Version
---------- ----------
certifi    2018.11.29
chardet    3.0.4
idna       2.8
pip        19.0.1
requests   2.21.0
setuptools 40.6.2
urllib3    1.24.1
```

## Finding packages through pip from PyPI or any URL

As you can see above, pip help shows that there is a search command that looks for packages published to PyPI. Let’s see how this command can help us:

```
pip search [options] <query>

Description:
  Search for PyPI packages whose name or summary contains <query>.

Search Options:
  -i, --index <url>           Base URL of Python Package Index
                              (default https://pypi.org/pypi)
                              you can chance this link to your target service
```

The command takes a set of options listed above and a . The query is just a string to search for and will match the packages and their descriptions. ## Evaluating dependencies before uninstalling a package

Before you uninstall a package, make sure you run the show command for that package:

```
$ pip show requests

Name: requests
Version: 2.21.0
Summary: Python HTTP for Humans.
Home-page: http://python-requests.org
Author: Kenneth Reitz
Author-email: me@kennethreitz.org
License: Apache 2.0
Location: c:\users\isaac\projects\virtualenv\py37\lib\site-packages
Requires: urllib3, certifi, chardet, idna
Required-by:
```

At least notice the last two fields ***Requires*** and ***Required-by***. The show command tells us that requests requires urllib3, certifi, chardet, and idna. You can also see that requests is not required by any other package, so it is safe to uninstall it. Remember to always check the dependencies of packages you want to uninstall. You probably want to uninstall a package, but uninstalling a package that is being used by others will break your application.

If you know what you are doing, you can also uninstall all the packages through requirement.txt file.

```
pip uninstall -r requirement.txt
```

You can choose whether uninstalling the package by the order as promoted by the requirements.txt
