# 📖 Table of Contents
* [What are wheels and why you should care?](#what-are-wheels-and-why-you-should-care)
  * [Before we go, let’s see a glossary](#before-we-go-lets-see-a-glossary) 
    * [What is a site-package?](#what-is-a-site-package) 
    * [What is a Source Distribution?](#what-is-a-source-distribution)
    * [What is a Built Distribution?](#what-is-a-built-distribution)
    * [the first example installing from source distribution](#the-first-example-installing-from-source-distribution)
    * [the second example installing from wheels](#the-second-example-installing-from-wheels)
  * [Wheels Make Things Go Fast](#wheels-make-things-go-fast)
  * [What Is a Python Wheel?](#what-is-a-python-wheel)
  * [what compose of wheels’ contents](#what-compose-of-wheels-contents)

# What are wheels and why you should care?

[reference](https://realpython.com/python-wheels/)

You will learn what wheels are and how they compare to source distributions?

You will learn how you can use wheels to control the package installation process?

## Before we go, let’s see a glossary

### What is a site-package?

site-packages is the target directory of manually built Python packages. When you build and install Python packages from source (using distutils, probably by executing python setup.py install ), you will find the installed modules in site-packages by default.

### What is a Source Distribution?

A [Source Distribution](https://packaging.python.org/glossary/#term-source-distribution-or-sdist)(sdist) is a distribution format(usually generated using setup.py) that provides metadata and the essential source files needed for installing by pip, or for generating a **`Built Distibution`**. Source distributions contain a bundle of metadata setting in a directory called .egg-info or packagename-version.dist-info .This metadata helps with ***building and installing the package***, but user’s don’t really need to do anything with it. A source distribution also contains source code. That includes not only Python code but also the source code of any extension modules (usually in C or C++) bundled with the package. With source distributions, extension modules are compiled on the user’s side rather than the developer’s. From the developer’s perspective, a source distribution is what gets created when you run the following command:

```shell script 
$ python setup.py sdict
```

### What is a Built Distribution?

[Built Distribution](https://packaging.python.org/glossary/#term-Built-Distribution) –A Distribution format containing files and metadata that only need to be moved to the correct location on the target system,to be installed. Source distribution requires a build step before it can be installed. [Egg](https://packaging.python.org/glossary/#term-Egg) is a **`Built Distribution`** format introduced by setuptools which is being replaced by Wheel. [Wheel](https://packaging.python.org/glossary/#term-Wheel) is a **`Built Distribution`** format, which is intended to replace the Egg format. Wheels are a component of python ecosystem that makes package installation just work.They allow for faster installation and more stability in the package distribution process. Python wheels or .whl files have been a boon(好处,非常有用的东西) to the installation process for [Python packages](https://realpython.com/python-modules-packages/). If you have installed a Python package using [pip](https://realpython.com/what-is-pip/), then chances are that a wheel has made the installation faster and more efficient.

### the first example installing from source distribution

A good way to learn how wheels work is to start by installing something that isn’t a wheel. You can start this experiment by installing a Python package into your environment just as you might normally do. In this case, install uWSGI version 2.0.x:

```
1$  python -m pip install 'uwsgi==2.0.*'
2  Collecting uwsgi==2.0.*
3   Downloading uwsgi-2.0.18.tar.gz (801 kB)
4       |████████████████████████████████| 801 kB 1.1 MB/s
5   Building wheels for collected packages: uwsgi
6    Building wheel for uwsgi (setup.py) ... done
7    Created wheel for uwsgi ... uWSGI-2.0.18-cp38-cp38-macosx_10_15_x86_64.whl
8    Stored in directory: /private/var/folders/jc/8_hqsz0x1tdbp05 ...
9   Successfully built uwsgi
10 Installing collected packages: uwsgi
11 Successfully installed uwsgi-2.0.18
```

To fully install uWSGI, pip progresses through several distinct steps:

1. On line 3, it downloads a TAR file (tarball) named uwsgi-2.0.18.tar.gz that’s been compressed with gzip,**which is a source distribution** .
2. On line 6, it takes the tarball and builds a .whl file through a call to setup.py.**which is the process of building on source distribution.**
3. On line 7, it labels the wheel uWSGI-2.0.18-cp38-cp38-macosx_10_15_x86_64.whl.
4. On line 10, it installs the actual package after having built the wheel.

The tar.gz tarball that pip retrieves(检索) is a **`source distribution`**, or **`sdist`**, rather than a **`wheel`**.

### the second example installing from wheels

```
1$ python -m pip install 'chardet==3.*'
2  Collecting chardet
3    Downloading chardet-3.0.4-py2.py3-none-any.whl (133 kB)
4       |████████████████████████████████| 133 kB 1.5 MB/s
5  Installing collected packages: chardet
6  Successfully installed chardet-3.0.4
```

You can see a noticeably different output than the last “uwsgi” installation. Installing chardet, your device downloads a .whl file directly from PyPI. The wheel name chardet-3.0.4-py2.py3-none-any.whl, which refers as `[packagename]`-`[version](-[build])?`-`[compatible python version]`-`[abi]`-`[platform]`.whl
Here’s an illustrative example using a `cryptography` wheel:

```
cryptography-2.9.2-cp35-abi3-macosx_10_9_x86_64.whl
```

cryptography distributes multiple wheels. Each wheel is a platform wheel, meaning it supports only specific combinations of Python versions,Python ABIs, operating systems, and machine architectures.You can break down the naming convention into parts: 
1. `cryptography` is the package name.
2. `2.9.2` is the package version of cryptography.
3. The `cp` stands for `CPython`, the reference implementation of Python,while the `35` denotes `Python 3.5`. In a word, `cp35` is the Python tag and denotes the Python implementation and version that the wheel demands.This wheel cannot be installed by [Jython](https://www.jython.org/) or `python3.7` for instance.
4. `abi3` is the ABI tag. [ABI](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/2171177/what-is-an-application-binary-interface-abi/2456882#2456882) stands for `application binary interface`. You just need to know that abi3 is a separate version for the binary compatibility of the Python C API.
5. `macosx_10_9_x86_64` is the platform tag, where `macosx` is the macOS operating system. `_10_9` is the macOS developer tools SDK version used to compiled the Python that in turn build this wheel.
    
    `Xcode10.9` compile the package and build this wheel.
    
    `x86_64` is a reference to x86-64 instruction set architecture.
    

Combined, the above components indicate the target machine that this wheel designed for.

**When pip finds a compatible wheel on PyPI,there is no build stage from user perspective.** From a developer’s side, a wheel is the result of running the following command:

```shell script 
$ python setup.py bdist_wheel
```
----
Why does uWSGI hand you a source distribution while chardet provides a wheel?  You can see the reason for this by taking a look at each project’s page on PyPI and navigating to the Download files area. This section will show you what pip actually sees on the PyPI server: * `uWSGI` provides only a source distribution (uwsgi-2.0.18.tar.gz) for reasons related to the ***complexity of the project***. * `chardet` provides both a `wheel` and a `source distribution`, but ***pip prefer the wheel if it’s compatible with your system***.You’ll see how that compatibility is determined later on. So far, you’ve seen some of the visible distinctions between a wheel and sdist, but what matters more is the impact those differences have on the installation process. 
## Wheels Make Things Go Fast

From above two examples, you saw a comparison of an installation that downloads a source distribution(sdist) and one that fetches prebuilt wheel. Wheels make the end-to-end installation of Python packages faster for two reason: 
* wheels are typically smaller in size than source distributions meaning they can move faster across a network. 
* Installing from wheels directly avoids the intermediate step of building packages from the source distribution.
## What Is a Python Wheel?

```
A wheel is a type of built distribution. In this case, built means that the wheel comes in a ready-to-install format and allows you to skip the build stage required with source distributions.
```

Note: It’s worth mentioning that despite the use of the term built, a wheel doesn’t contain .pyc files, or compiled Python bytecode.

## what compose of wheels’ contents

Wheel file is actually a .zip archive. You can take following command to check what a wheel file contains. For instance, if you want to view a wheel’s contents, you can use unzip:

```
unzip -l six*.whl
Archive:  six-1.14.0-py2.py3-none-any.whl
  Length      Date    Time    Name
---------  ---------- -----   ----
    34074  01-15-2020 18:10   six.py
     1066  01-15-2020 18:10   six-1.14.0.dist-info/LICENSE
     1795  01-15-2020 18:10   six-1.14.0.dist-info/METADATA
      110  01-15-2020 18:10   six-1.14.0.dist-info/WHEEL
        4  01-15-2020 18:10   six-1.14.0.dist-info/top_level.txt
      435  01-15-2020 18:10   six-1.14.0.dist-info/RECORD
---------                     -------
    37484                     6 files
```
