# Difference between Conda and Pip

- conda is both a multiple-language package manager and an environment manager.
- pip is only a python-language package manager.

---

[reference](https://www.anaconda.com/blog/understanding-conda-and-pip) Pip only install python packages(which may need other language head to help finish compile) Conda install packages which may contain software written in any language.

## Difference on packages

Conda and pip are often considered as being nearly identical. Although some of the functionality of these two tools overlap, they were designed and should be used for different purposes.

Pip is the Python Packaging Authority’s recommended tool for installing packages from the Python Package Index, PyPI. ***Pip installs Python software packaged as wheels or source distributions***. The latter may require that the system have compatible compilers, and possibly libraries, installed before invoking pip to succeed.

Conda is a cross platform package and environment manager that installs and manages conda packages from the Anaconda repository as well as from the Anaconda Cloud. ***Conda packages are binaries***. There is never a need to have compilers available to install them. ***Additionally conda packages are not limited to Python software. They may also contain C or C++ libraries, R packages or any other software***.

## Difference on the package written language

This highlights a key difference between conda and pip. ***Pip installs Python packages whereas conda installs packages which may contain software written in any language***. For example, before using pip, a Python interpreter must be installed via a system package manager or by downloading and running an installer.

## Difference on the virtual environment

Another key difference between the two tools is that ***conda has the ability to create isolated environments that can contain different versions of Python*** and the related packages installed in them.This can be extremely useful when working with data science tools as different tools may contain conflicting requirements which could prevent them all being installed into a single environment.
However,***pip can only have one python versions to manage***. Pip has no built in support for environments but rather depends on other tools like `virtualenv` or `venv` to create isolated environments.

### the way conda create virtual environment

```
conda create -n virtualenv_name python=3.8.5
conda create -n virtualenv_name python=3.7.6
```

virtual environment name and python version all can be specified or customized by needing. ### the way venv create virtual environment

```
python3 -m venv virtualenv_name
```

## We need them both

Given the similarities between conda and pip, it is not surprising that some try to combine these tools to create data science environments. Occasionally a package is needed which is not available as a conda package but is available on PyPI and can be installed with pip. In these cases, it makes sense to try to use both conda and pip.
